---
title: "Designing at a Distance: the Practice of Designing Products with Algorithms"
author: "Michael Dewar"
date: 2020-12-28T18:26:48Z
draft: false
--- 

When we design and build products with algorithms, we’re working in a situation where there is significant distance between us and the experience we’re designing. What we write is never read, the products we build aren’t realised until they’re consumed, and the technology that supports them is practically unknowable. 

This post breaks this distance down into three components, to begin an argument that product design that uses algorithms needs a considered practice if we’re to build, deploy, and talk about the products that have become possible.  

When we design products using algorithms we’re mostly writing text - recipes that describe how something elsewhere should happen at some later date. Like any text we’re not going to be there when our algorithms are “read”. But unlike other text it’s not the algorithm - the thing we wrote - that’s read, it’s the algorithm’s output that’s experienced as a product. When we design with algorithms we are immediately twice removed from the artifact we’re designing; the text we write isn’t read, and the experience we design only happens without us.   

Some algorithms completely contain the resulting design, like Sol Lewitt’s “Wall Drawings” or Rosenkrantz & Louis-Rosenberg’s generative jewelry. In these designs the algorithm is captured as a set of instructions that, when executed by a gallery intern or a 3D printer, result in artifacts whose properties were already in the algorithm as written. The designs become concrete when executed. They are unconcerned with the outside world, and we take small pleasures in the aesthetics when the outside world intrudes - the shadows and light in the gallery or the texture of the printed ceramics. 

Some algorithms can be thought of as transformations where data flows through the algorithm, changing states as it flows. A multi-user word processor uses an algorithm to synchronise a single document as multiple people edit it. Text flows from the writers’ fingers, through the algorithm and back out again into the writers’ eyes in the form of a shared image on a screen. The algorithm’s design is such that the people engaged with it are largely unaware of its execution; the algorithm’s designers carefully sacrifice moments of consistency to achieve a pleasurable collaborative writing experience. 

Some algorithms incorporate data into themselves: information gathered from outside the machine used to affect the operation of the machine. The lovely design of Spotify’s Daily Mixes, presumably synthesises listening data from millions of devices via some clustering algorithm into a set of personalised playlists. The gathered data adjusts the operation of the recommendation algorithm as it goes, generating a feedback loop where external listening data becomes music recommendation which in turns becomes more listening data, and so on. Behaviour becomes product becomes behaviour.

In all three examples, the algorithms aren’t read by the people experiencing the design, with the exception of Sol Lewitt’s work, the simplicity of which hopefully proves the rule. The equations, formal algorithms, data structures, and machine learning contained in the above three examples - all captured as text that we as designers write - are all hidden to the product’s user. Despite being hidden, the design choices we make within and between algorithms obviously have radical effects on those products and so must be considered in their context, like any other product. 

In all three examples, the algorithm is experienced away from the designers, with the exception of Rosenkrantz & Louis-Rosenberg’s work whose physical forms presumably (?) emerge in their studio before being shipped to the client. For the rest though, the algorithm’s effect is only felt when it’s executed - when Lewitt’s instructions are interpreted at the gallery, or when the word processor is trying to keep three physically distant author’s view of a document consistent, or Spotify’s recommendation algorithm produces a personalised mix tape for me. If anything else, for a designer of products like these, it’s terrifying - letting your algorithms out into the world to be executed and consumed without you holding its hand. You know there will be bugs in your product, and by the bug’s very definition you don’t know what or where they are. You can only watch, and wait, and iterate.  

The third distance comes from the practical implementation of our algorithms. As in all the other layers of a technical product, the physical “where” of the algorithm is often too complex to be understood, not unlike the software that implements it, the processors that execute it, the circuitry that powers it, or the logistics that assemble it. As designers who use algorithms to build products, we are often in the position of being the final layer of complexity in an already too-complicated-to-read stack, inserting the last little bit of complexity into a huge assemblage of networks, machines, and lower-level algorithms that have been accruing for decades. 

For Lewitt the where is in the gallery; for Rosenkrantz & Louis-Rosenberg the where is in a 3D printer. The word processor executes on and over a network of computers, with portions running in the browser on the writer’s laptops and other portions in the servers of the word processor. Spotify’s algorithm is even more complex, executed over the space of a network, like the word processor, but also over time as more and more labelled data is captured and synthesised and made product.


The practice then, of building products using algorithms, is the practice of overcoming these distances. We have tools from software engineering to help with the practical bits; we have behavioural approaches to design we can borrow from the traditional product design and user experience communities; ethical and socio-techincal critique from the anthropologists and regulators; and an increasingly powerful algorithm palette from the computer science, engineering, and AI communities. The design practice I’m interested in is around how to bring these tools to bear when the text we write isn’t read, the experience we design happens without us, and the systems that execute them are complex and distributed.

